# SQL queries

Now that we understand the general concept behind relational data, how do we
query it? Note that every SQL database may have slightly different syntax in
terms of quotations, capitalization, commas, etc., so be sure to check. In these
examples, we will be using MySQL.

Suppose you have an existing MySQL database. To create the `customer` table (we
will now lowercase the table names by convention), you would use the `CREATE
TABLE` statement. Note that every column has a data type and can also be given additional definition rules.

[`AUTO_INCREMENT`](https://www.guru99.com/auto-increment.html) is used to
automatically generated the IDs; when inserting a row, you do not need to
provide the ID, it is automatically generated by incrementing the previous ID. We will see this in our example queries later. `NOT NULL` means that the user cannot provide a `NULL` value for values in this column. `PRIMARY KEY` is used to denote a column as the primary key field, and it is often used in conjunction with `AUTO INCREMENT` for databases with numeric IDs.

There are many options when creating columns. Refer to the [`CREATE TABLE`
documentation](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.0/en/create-table.html).
```sql
CREATE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS customer (
    task_id INT AUTO_INCREMENT PRIMARY KEY,
    first_name VARCHAR(255) NOT NULL,
    last_name VARCHAR(255) NOT NULL,
    created_at TIMESTAMP DEFAULT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP
)  
```

We can now add some data using `INSERT INTO`. Note that we do not need to
manually provide an id or a created timestamp, these are automatically generated
by MySQL.

```sql
INSERT INTO customer (first_name, last_name) VALUES ('Halit', 'Batur');
INSERT INTO customer (first_name, last_name) VALUES ('Ammar', 'Sammour');
```

Now let's `SELECT` the data -- that is, let's view the data.
```sql
SELECT * FROM customer;
```

The `*` symbol tells us to get all columns. You should see something like this:

```
 id | first_name | last_name |          created_at
----+------------+-----------+-------------------------------
  1 | Halit      | Batur     | 2021-08-29 03:33:14.559122-07
  2 | Ammar      | Sammour   | 2021-08-29 03:34:08.522222-07
(1 row)
```

However, you could select only certain columns by typing the name of the column:
```sql
SELECT first_name FROM customer;
```

Finally, let's create a table with a foreign key, the `order` table, noting the
syntax that is used to create a foreign key that references our `customer`
table.

```sql
CREATE TABLE student (
  id INT AUTO_INCREMENT PRIMARY KEY,
  product VARCHAR(255) NOT NULL,
  delivered BOOL,
  customer_id INT FOREIGN KEY REFERENCES customer(id)
);
```


